                                                                                        E

                                                A Dialogue on Labs


Student: Is this our final dialogue?
Professor: I hope so! You’ve been becoming quite a pain, you know!
Student: Yes, I’ve enjoyed our conversations too. What’s up here?
Professor: It’s about the projects you should be doing as you learn this material;
you know, actual programming, where you do some real work instead of this
incessant talking and reading. The real way to learn!
Student: Sounds important. Why didn’t you tell me earlier?
Professor: Well, hopefully those using this book actually do look at this part
earlier, all throughout the course. If not, they’re really missing something.
Student: Seems like it. So what are the projects like?
Professor: Well, there are two types of projects. The first set are what you might
call systems programming projects, done on machines running Linux and in
the C programming environment. This type of programming is quite useful to
know, as when you go off into the real world, you very well might have to do
some of this type of hacking yourself.
Student: What’s the second type of project?
Professor: The second type is based inside a real kernel, a cool little teaching
kernel developed at MIT called xv6. It is a “port” of an old version of U NIX
to Intel x86, and is quite neat! With these projects, instead of writing code that
interacts with the kernel (as you do in systems programming), you actually get
to re-write parts of the kernel itself!
Student: Sounds fun! So what should we do in a semester? You know, there are
only so many hours in the day, and as you professors seem to forget, we students
take four or five courses, not just yours!
Professor: Well, there is a lot of flexibility here. Some classes just do all systems
programming, because it is so practical. Some classes do all xv6 hacking, because
it really gets you to see how operating systems work. And some, as you may have
guessed, do a mix, starting with some systems programming, and then doing xv6
at the end. It’s really up to the professor of a particular class.

                                         1
2                                                                         A D IALOGUE ON L ABS


                  Student: (sighing) Professors have all the control, it seems...
                  Professor: Oh, hardly! But that little control they do get to exercise is one of
                  the fun parts of the job. Deciding on assignments is important you know — and
                  not something any professor takes lightly.
                  Student: Well, that is good to hear. I guess we should see what these projects
                  are all about...
                  Professor: OK. And one more thing: if you’re interested in the systems pro-
                  gramming part, there is also a little tutorial about the U NIX and C programming
                  environment.
                  Student: Sounds almost too useful to be true.
                  Professor: Well, take a look. You know, classes are supposed to be about useful
                  things, sometimes!




O PERATING
S YSTEMS
[V ERSION 0.90]                                  WWW. OSTEP. ORG
