                                                                                      G

                                Laboratory: Systems Projects


      This chapter presents some ideas for systems projects. We usually do
      about six or seven projects in a 15-week semester, meaning one every two
      weeks or so. The first few are usually done by a single student, and the
      last few in groups of size two.
         Each semester, the projects follow this same outline; however, we vary
      the details to keep it interesting and make “sharing” of code across semesters
      more challenging (not that anyone would do that!). We also use the Moss
      tool [M94] to look for this kind of “sharing”.
         As for grading, we’ve tried a number of different approaches, each
      of which have their strengths and weaknesses. Demos are fun but time
      consuming. Automated test scripts are less time intensive but require a
      great deal of care to get them to carefully test interesting corner cases.
      Check the book web page for more details on these projects; if you’d like
      the automated test scripts, we’d be happy to share.

G.1 Intro Project
         The first project is an introduction to systems programming. Typical
      assignments have been to write some variant of the sort utility, with
      different constraints. For example, sorting text data, sorting binary data,
      and other similar projects all make sense. To complete the project, one
      must get familiar with some system calls (and their return error codes),
      use a few simple data structures, and not much else.

G.2   U NIX Shell
         In this project, students build a variant of a U NIX shell. Students learn
      about process management as well as how mysterious things like pipes
      and redirects actually work. Variants include unusual features, like a
      redirection symbol that also compresses the output via gzip. Another
      variant is a batch mode which allows the user to batch up a few requests
      and then execute them, perhaps using different scheduling disciplines.

                                           1
2                                                        L ABORATORY: S YSTEMS P ROJECTS


        G.3 Memory-allocation Library
                     This project explores how a chunk of memory is managed, by building
                  an alternative memory-allocation library (like malloc() and free()
                  but with different names). The project teaches students how to use mmap()
                  to get a chunk of anonymous memory, and then about pointers in great
                  detail in order to build a simple (or perhaps, more complex) free list to
                  manage the space. Variants include: best/worst fit, buddy, and various
                  other allocators.

        G.4 Intro to Concurrency
                     This project introduces concurrent programming with POSIX threads.
                  Build some simple thread-safe libraries: a list, hash table, and some more
                  complicated data structures are good exercises in adding locks to real-
                  world code. Measure the performance of coarse-grained versus fine-grained
                  alternatives. Variants just focus on different (and perhaps more complex)
                  data structures.

        G.5 Concurrent Web Server
                     This project explores the use of concurrency in a real-world applica-
                  tion. Students take a simple web server (or build one) and add a thread
                  pool to it, in order to serve requests concurrently. The thread pool should
                  be of a fixed size, and use a producer/consumer bounded buffer to pass
                  requests from a main thread to the fixed pool of workers. Learn how
                  threads, locks, and condition variables are used to build a real server.
                  Variants include scheduling policies for the threads.

        G.6 File System Checker
                     This project explores on-disk data structures and their consistency.
                  Students build a simple file system checker. The debugfs tool can be
                  used on Linux to make real file-system images; crawl through them and
                  make sure all is well. To make it more difficult, also fix any problems that
                  are found. Variants focus on different types of problems: pointers, link
                  counts, use of indirect blocks, etc.

        G.7 File System Defragmenter
                      This project explores on-disk data structures and their performance
                  implications. The project should give some particular file-system images
                  to students with known fragmentation problems; students should then
                  crawl through the image, and look for files that are not laid out sequen-
                  tially. Write out a new “defragmented” image that fixes this problem,
                  perhaps reporting some statistics.




O PERATING
S YSTEMS
[V ERSION 0.90]                                WWW. OSTEP. ORG
     L ABORATORY: S YSTEMS P ROJECTS                                                  3


G.8 Concurrent File Server
         This project combines concurrency and file systems and even a little
     bit of networking and distributed systems. Students build a simple con-
     current file server. The protocol should look something like NFS, with
     lookups, reads, writes, and stats. Store files within a single disk image
     (designed as a file). Variants are manifold, with different suggested on-
     disk formats and network protocols.




                                                                                 T HREE
                            c 2014, A RPACI -D USSEAU                              E ASY
                                                                                 P IECES
4                                                               L ABORATORY: S YSTEMS P ROJECTS


                  References
                  [M94] “Moss: A System for Detecting Software Plagiarism”
                  Alex Aiken
                  Available: http://theory.stanford.edu/˜aiken/moss/




O PERATING
S YSTEMS
[V ERSION 0.90]                                    WWW. OSTEP. ORG
